Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Jonathan Ichikawa. She, he
is a professor of philosophy and department head at
the University of British Columbia. And today we're talking
about his book, Epistemic Courage. So, Doctor Ichikawa, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Uh, THANKS so much. Happy to be here. Looking
forward to talking.
So, epistemic courage, this is, I think, a topic
at the intersection between ethics and epistemology. So, let's
perhaps introduce the topic a little bit. First of
all, what is the ethics of belief?
Good, thanks. That's a good place to start. So
in general, I think um the ethics of anything
is the Um, study of normative questions about that
thing. So if you're working in the ethics of
war, you're interested in when is war justified, what's
the moral importance of various kinds of actions that
you might, um, that, that occur in war. Um,
IF you are looking at the ethics of sex,
you're thinking about when is sex OK, when is
it sexual assaults, um, and what are the interesting
normative things to, to say about, um, Um, those
distinctions. So the ethics of belief has to do
with um normative questions around belief, uh, paradigmatically, um,
when should you believe something, when should you not
believe something. Um, IS, um, having unreasonable beliefs harmful?
What motivation, what, what, uh, um, why is it
important to do a good job believing, um, substantive
questions about, um, under what circumstances does the evidence
tell you to believe or not to, and what
are the theoretical constraints about that. Um, ONE of
the, um, big open questions in the ethics of
belief. Concerns whether um epistemology, which is, you know,
the branch of philosophy that that um particularly focuses
on normative questions about belief, is using its own
like distinctive um form of normativity. So when we
say, you know, you shouldn't believe that because there's
not enough evidence, is that a moral norm or
a different kind of norm or a distinctively epistemic
norm, those are, um, among the, the central questions
in the ethics of belief.
And I mean, in a more general way, in
what ways do ethics and epistemology relate to one
another?
Yeah, this is a great question. This is a
really big question, um, and I, I, I don't
think, um, the answer is at all settled or
even that there's a very strong consensus in the
literature, but I have my own take, which I'll
tell you, um. I think that ethics and epistemology
are importantly different from one another, um, but together,
um, they're quite fundamental normative domains toward, um, human
experience and indeed, you know, um, any kinds of
actors. Um, I think that, uh, any agent who
has interests, um, um, goes around the world facing
complicated decisions about what to do. And uh the
main um strategy that at least agents like us
have to in um doing a good job answering
those questions, um uh involves kind of um simplifying
the complicated question of how to behave in the
world into um uh uh kind of a function
of two, still a complicated but slightly simpler sets
of questions, um, and I think of them as
ethical questions about what sorts of goals are appropriate,
um. And epistemic questions about how to represent what's
going on in the world. If you want to
make good decisions, you basically need to do two
things. You need to, um, you need to have
the right aims and ethics is kind of about
setting the right aims, and he needs to, um,
have good beliefs. You need to do a good
job recognizing what situation you're in so that you
can make strategic decisions to pursue those aims, and
that's what epistemology is about. Some people do think
that um it's much more muddled together than that,
um, to an extreme, some people think that uh
um there that, you know, epistemic norms just are
ethical norms, um, but I, I do think that
they're important theoretical reasons to understand them as, um,
doing importantly different things. That's not to say that
there aren't, um, many morally significant. Get questions with
epistemology and indeed my book I think is um
is really foregrounding, uh, many of them. Um, SO
it's, it's morally important to do a good job
forming beliefs, um, but I do think that there
is a, um, distinctive epistemic kind of normativity, and
it's possible to study kind of, um, uh, the
question of what to believe in a way that's
separate from the question of what to value. Mhm.
So, when talking about courage, of course, we're talking
about virtue and in ethics, there are different kinds
of ethical theories. In this case, we're talking about
virtue ethics specifically. So what is virtue epistemology?
Good question. One can use that label for um
uh more or less distinctive ideas. Um, uh, IF
when use it in a kind of stronger way,
um, kind of parallel to the way that people
often talk about like virtue ethics when you're doing
like an intro ethics course, where you know, there's,
there's the geontological theories and there's the virtue ethics
theories and are like doing quite different kinds of
things. One can do the same thing in epistemology.
Um, um, I'm not making a claim that strong.
When I'm, when I'm exploring, um, the kind of
virtual epistemology that I'm exploring in my book, that's
not because I think like, um, there are no
general norms at the the ontological level, um, that
govern when belief is permissible. Um, I'm not taking
a stance on questions about like epistemic consequentialism. Um,
WHAT I'm doing is I'm emphasizing that there are,
um, important. TRAITS that can be manifested by thinkers,
um, and that it's useful, um, at least some
of the time to be doing some of our
epistemological theorizing, um, at that level. Um, AND I'm,
I'm quite pluralist about this, so I'm not making
any kind of Priority claim. It's not like, um,
uh, you know, the only way you can explain
a good belief is by like what a good
believer would believe. I'm not saying something like that.
Some people, some, some virtu, some virtue epistemologists, um,
do say things like that. Um, WHAT I'm saying
is, is, is more modest in this sense, um.
I'm saying there's certain kinds of um um habits,
character traits, um, belief dispositions um that we um
uh manifest when we're going around the world, and
we can gain some insight into focusing on those
traits of thinkers. An epistemic courage is um Is
the main virtue that I'm um that I'm exploring
in my book and that's really um this trait
of kind of uh not being too skeptical, not
being too reckless or too gullible, um having this
kind of good balance um of um of being
um open to acceptance the right amount and I
think that um. That quite often, um, the way
epistemologists but also, uh, you know, the, um, the
culture at large thinks about epistemology, um, tends to
have, uh, the wrong balance there and, um, employing
uh this, this virtue of courage which I think
in like Aristotelian senses it's kind of a mean
between two vices, um, I think that can be
a helpful corrective to some of the mistakes that
I'm seeing in the culture and the literature.
Mhm. So one of the main questions that you
address in the book is, what is bad belief?
Uh, SO what is actually bad belief and is
this an epistemology question, an ethics question, or
both? Good. Um, I think that, um. Fundamentally, There's
a level of epistemic evaluation, uh sorry, a level
of doxtastic evaluation. So, you know, our beliefs, good
or good beliefs or bad beliefs, um, that is,
um, essentially epistemological, uh, not, not, uh, not ethical.
So, um, and that's mostly what I'm focusing on
in, in my book. So when I talk about
bad beliefs. Um, I, I don't mean, you know,
beliefs that it's morally wrong to have. I mean
beliefs that are, um, inconsistent with epistemic norms. And,
um, uh, and in a way, a focus on
bad beliefs is very characteristic of, um, lots of
mainstream epistemology as well as um mainstream kind of
um uh informal thought about belief in epistemology. So,
I mean just think about. Um, uh, THE way
that, um, the way people Emphasize um the importance
of having enough evidence before you believe. So, um,
if you, if, if you um introduce epistemology, um,
in epistemology course, um, or, you know, um, talking
to a fellow citizen about, you know, what they're
noticing going on in the world, um, what a
lot of people notice is, oh, there's so many
people who just kind of believe whatever they're told
or believe whatever they want to believe even though
there's not good evidence for them. Um, AND, um,
uh, you know, part of epistemology is about trying
to correct that. And so you get, um, you
know, these negative epistemic norms that say make sure
that you get enough evidence before you believe, make
sure you don't have unjustified beliefs, uh, make sure
you're only trusting reliable sources, um. And that's all
well and good. I don't object to that, um,
but I, I do object in my book to
what I see as the undue emphasis on those
questions at the expense of um sort of the
converse set of questions. ABOUT making the opposite mistake.
So the mistake everyone talks about is the mistake
of believing things they shouldn't of, of having bad
beliefs, um, and you know, that's usually based on
evidential terms so the people often emphasize the moral
harms of that which I, I think that are,
are, um, it's absolutely correct to do. Um, I
think people need to pay more attention than they
often do, um, to the other possible mistake you
can make. So epistemology is about doing a good
job deciding what to believe. One mistake you can
make is believing something you shouldn't, believing something that
is not enough evidence for him, having a bad
belief, um. Everyone talks about that one. The other
mistake that you can make, uh, which people need
to talk more about than they do, is the
mistake of being too skeptical, the mistake of not
believing something that you should, the failure to have
good beliefs, or if you like, you can describe
it as like bad suspension of judgment. Um, I
think that those really um deserve equal standing. They're
both very important, um, components of the epistemological project.
Um, AND I think too much of us focus
too much of the time on that, uh, negative
side, uh, on epistemology telling you what not to
believe. We need to recognize the cases that when
epistemology is telling you when you should believe and
what it would be a mistake not to.
And do you think that either of those mistakes
is a bigger problem than the other? There is
people believing too easily things they shouldn't is a
bigger problem than than them failing to believe things
they should or vice versa, or, I mean, how
do you approach this question?
Yeah, it's a complicated question. um, AND in a
way, it's not totally obvious to me, um, what
kind of metric is appropriate for even kind of
measuring like the size of the problem, those kinds
of things. So I'm, I'm not totally sure what
to say. My instinct really is to say Um,
that they're equally important. Um, I, I definitely don't
want, um, to, to be saying, um, that it's
wrong to be focusing on negative epistemic norms. It's,
it's wrong to worry about bad belief. I don't
think that at all. Um, MY book is really,
um, trying to set that aside, not because I
don't think it's important because I think there's plenty
of attention paid to those questions already. Um, SO
my stance is, uh, there's been kind of an,
um, uh, um, nearly exclusive emphasis on the negative
side of epistemology, and I think the positive side
of epistemology is very important, um, you know, I
guess I think probably. Approximately equally important if I,
if I know how to measure that, um, but
because there's been such a focus on the negative,
um, um, in the literature elsewhere, um, I'm trying
to correct that by focusing much more on the
positive in this book. Mhm.
So in your book, you point to the existence
of a negative bias about belief, both in epistemology
and also in non-academic discussions of intelligence, rationality, and
so on. Could you explain that the bias, the,
the negative bias?
Sure, yeah. So I mean, what I mean by
the existence of the, of, of the bias is
kind of just what I said, even though they're
both really important, there's so much more attention that's
put on the negative side. Um, I can say
a little bit um to kind of illustrate why
I think that's so. Um, um, FOR one thing,
So much of our discourse um is wrapped up
around um Question around kind of um uh a
veneration of um careful consideration, where careful is really
um uh stereotypically, conceptually, tightly coded to um being
slow to believe, collecting more evidence before you kind
of reach your conclusion. A lot of the metaphors
that we use to talk about these things, I
think in code, um, um, what I see as
a bias. So, uh, people talk about the importance
of not jumping to conclusions. Um, um, THE implicit,
um, assumption behind the metaphor is, you know, when
you jump, you're leaving somewhere safe to something that
might be dangerous. Um, SO that's kind of assuming
this idea that suspension of judgment is always the
safe thing and believing is the potentially dangerous thing
that you better make sure you've, um, you've done
your due diligence before doing. Um, OUR stereotypes of
rationality, I think really, um, strongly encode, um, slowness
to act, um, um, we, we worry a lot
about kind of, um, making sure you don't get
duped. There's this like, um, there's this, um, deep
stereotypical association between being skeptical and like being rational.
Being intelligent. And sometimes you see this like uh
laid out explicitly, you know, you see people saying,
oh, you know, it's never wrong to um to
be um skeptical, even if it turns out that,
um, you know, the evidential supports, uh, the evidential
source that you're looking at is accurate, um, you
know, scrutinizing it more closely can, uh, never be
a mistake. And I think that's, um, I think
that's. Wrong and in some sense when you look
at it with like the right level of abstraction,
I think that's clearly wrong. I think that there
are substantive and often difficult questions about um when
you've done enough investigation, when you've done enough evidence
collection. Um, SOMETIMES it's hard to know, uh, not
just, um, you know, what your current evidence supports,
but whether you have gathered enough evidence and thought
about it enough, um, to make it reasonable to
an inquiry. And actually the fact that that can
be hard, um, just basically um entails that um
it's not always right to keep being more skeptical,
um because it were if it were then anytime
you, you, anytime you wondered whether to keep going,
you should just keep investigating. um, BUT sometimes you
shouldn't keep investigating. Sometimes you know enough, the question
is settled. And um that you're at best uh
wasting time by investigating further and depending on the
circumstances, um, you know, you might be missing opportunities
to take important actions. You might be disrespecting people
if what you're doing is, um, you know, continuing
to investigate whether their testimony is true and in
fact you have plenty of reason to conclude that
it is, um. This bias I think runs really
deep. Um, um, I I do a little bit
of uh sort of fanciful alternate history, philosophy, imagination
in my book, um, um, um, you know, lots
of, probably, probably the most commonly, um. Uh, Red
work of epistemology and epistemology courses is um the
opening of Descar's meditations, which opens with these very
skeptical, um, kind of natural ruminations. Um, THE meditator
says, oh, you know, I've been, uh, I've been
noticing that, um, I've been wrong about stuff previously
in my life. So here's a, here's a really
um sensible project. I should sit down and make
sure that that doesn't happen anymore. And the way
that I'll do that is I will like get
rid of all my beliefs and examine each one
can only only put the good ones back in.
And you know, that's a bit extreme, but like
the, the kind of uh motivation behind that is
something that intuitively makes sense. Um. In my book,
I imagine um Bizarro Descartes, who, um, so regular,
regular Descartes is motivated by negative epistemology. He wants
to make sure he never makes the mistake of
bad beliefs. Um, THIS hypothetical Bizarro Descartes that I've
invented, um, is, uh. Fixated on the opposite side
of epistemology. He's motivated by the observation that sometimes
things have happened and he didn't, he didn't, uh,
uh, notice that they happened. Um, HE'S really motivated
by making sure that, um, that he believes all
the true things. And so his strategy is to
um believe like absolutely everything and then only reject
those beliefs that he finds evidence against. And um
not only is that, you know, not, um, you
know, what um the historical character Dickard did, um,
it kind of feels like a joke. It it
feels it feels like a completely silly idea and
um. And the reason that I kind of put
these two characters next to each other is, uh,
you know, I, I do think Bizarro Dard is
being quite silly. Um, I think that he is,
um, unduly fixated on one half of epistemology and
he's pursuing a strategy that's gonna make all kinds
of mistakes on the other half. Um, BUT I
actually think exactly the same thing about the like
regulated art of, of the regular meditations, um, focusing
just on one side, um. IS a mistake. Um,
THE fact that like that mistake kind of like
feels sort of like common sense on one side,
but feels like a joke on the other, um,
I, I think also illustrates the degree to which
um we're sort of working in this, um, negatively
biased framing. Now I call it a bias, like,
you know, plenty of people think I'm wrong about
that, that actually there's good reason um why. SHOULD
be more focused on the negative. Um, uh, um,
I, I, I have arguments against that, um, but,
uh, but if you, if you, uh, if you
think as I do, that these are two equally
important sides of the project, um, then, uh, I,
I think it's hard to avoid the conclusion that
there has been a bias toward the negative, um,
in the history of philosophy and in like folk
ideas about rationality.
And in the book you refer to negative epistemology
as an ideology. Could you explain that?
Yeah, ideology is uh It's one of those words,
right? It, it, it, um, it. It means a
lot of things and not always the same in
different um in different bodies of literature, but, um,
but I'm, I'm taking the label um from kind
of it's, it's tradition and critical theory. Um, SO
ideologies are, um, Like, I mean quite generally an
ideology is like a, it's a framework of like
meaning or value in a culture. Um, IDEOLOGIES are
those, those bits of the culture that kind of
shape your understanding of what's going on in the
world and your role in the world, um, in
ways that, um, that. Um, CAN Make it difficult
to see that there's a substantive um framing or
shaping being made. So ideologies kind of by nature
um uh hide themselves. They, they take contingent um
choices about um the way a culture is organized
and they sort of uh disguise them under the
heading of objectivity or uh or necessity, um. Um,
THEY tend to perpetuate themselves, um, uh, um, uh,
through, um, through memes, through habits, through language, stereotypes,
um, basically ideas about what is normal. Um, SOME
people use, some people reserve the word ideology, um,
for what, um, Raymond Goyce calls its pejorative sense,
so it only counts as an ideology if it's
like doing bad stuff, uh, perpetuating oppression, um. Um,
AND I, I, um, I argue in my book
that this negative bias is ideological, um, um, in
both senses. So, um, so it has those features,
um, and does in some ways, um, perpetuate oppression,
um, by kind of reinforcing certain conservative status quo
biases, and I could talk more about why, why
I think that, um. But uh what makes it
ideological, um, is, um is that it has this
characteristic feature of um making, uh, this, um, what
I was just suggesting is a bias, this emphasis
on the negative side of epistemology, and making that
feel kind of obvious, making that feel natural, kind
of not like a choice at all. It's. Transmitted
through these stereotypes of rationality. So I mean, I
mean, the, the epistemological canon is to some degree
like part of the, the um cultural transmission. um,
BUT so much of this happens just in, uh,
more general memes and stereotypes, the metaphors, you know,
the, um, um, um, going out on a limb
as sort of, uh, describing belief, um. Um, THE,
the stereotype of a rational actor as an inactive,
slow, um, deliberate, collecting more evidence kind of, kind
of one. Another feature of ideologies they often um
work in like subtle ways to perpetuate themselves and
in some sense to even kind of um make
some of their commitments true. Ideologies are often um
uh deceptive. They, they, um they cause people um
who um are part of the cultures that they
characterize uh to have false ideas about those cultures.
So, you know, a um. Uh, IT'S part of
a, uh, patriarchal ideology, um, um, a whole suite
of like assumptions about gender essentialism and, you know,
what, um, men are like by nature and what
women are like by nature, and the gender binary
itself, um, and, um, uh, I think that that's
kind of, um, you know, those assumptions are, are
false. There is much more gender diversity than that,
um, but there in some uh Uh, complicated and
subtle way, um, less false than they, um, would
be without the ideology, cause the ideology tends to
enforce itself on people and, um, now that we
have these stereotypes about, you know, what men are
supposed to behave like, um, uh, men are incentivized
for very, you know, um, normal, um, rational reasons
to. THE stereotypes, um, which then makes it true
that men like tend to be, you know, tend,
um, are, um, more ambitious and more aggressive or,
or, um, whatever the example you're looking at. Uh,
WOMEN are motivated, um, um, by ideology, um, to
develop, um, uh, their, uh, nurturing sides and to,
to be mothers, um. And there it's a statistical
fact that um that men tend to behave in
these ways and women tend to behave in those
ways. I don't think it's true that's like by
nature. I think that ideology is kind of causing
people to conform um to um to those patterns.
So ideologies have this tendency also to um to
um socially construct their own um their own, the
truth of their own contents. Um, I think that
the negative bias in epistemology has all of these
features. So, um, uh, I've been talking already about
how it tends to be hidden, how it tends
to kind of disguise itself as objectivity. Um, I
think there are very interesting ways in which it
also tends to, uh, tends to make itself true.
And so, um, what that would, um, what that
would mean in this instance is cases. WHERE, um,
where I think the right thing to do is
to believe, um, the um negative epistemic bias um
tends to push us away from that. Um, AND
in some instances it can do so in a
way that actually um causes it, um, to be,
um, incorrect to believe. Um, SO this is subtle
because of, um, some of the distinctions between, you
know, belief and knowledge and acceptance, but the, but
the general kind of idea is, um, Um, the
more, um, uh, you have this negative epistemic, um,
bias in your culture, um, the more natural it's
going to be, um, to feel doubt about your
commitments, um, and, um, uh, and the feeling of
doubt is something that can, um, uh, um, uh.
Have not merely psychological effects, you know, making you
tend to, um, uh, you know, want to stop
believing, um, but epistemic effects. So for example, uh,
actually, here's, here's a simple example. If you doubt
enough to um make you to, to cause you,
um, to suspend judgment, um, well, that means you
don't, uh, know, you don't know the thing that
you, um, you maybe started out believing or that
you were considering believing, even if you had enough
evidence where if you've been confident enough, you would
have known. Um, WELL, I, I also think, uh,
you know, this is one of my commitments from,
from past work, not really a theme in this
book, but something that I do think, um, is
that, um, knowledge is deeply tied to the norms
of belief. Um, SO, um, uh, some, uh, some
epistemologists have codified this in a fairly simple way,
um, saying that like knowledge is the norm. You
should only believe things if you know them. Um,
I can't sign up to that simple formulation. Because
that would imply that in these cases that I'm
I was just talking about, um, if you um
if you doubt, even though you shouldn't have, um,
that causes you to stop knowing, um, and now
since you don't know, um, the implication would be
that you shouldn't believe. So if you have a
view like that, um, then, um, then the negative
bias itself is going to create genuine norms that
uh tell you not to believe. Now again, that's
not my view of, of epistemic normativity and for
like for for exactly this reason, um, but because
there's such a like um natural idea, um, which,
you know, I was convinced by in past work
and oh well if you don't know it, you
shouldn't believe it, that like that feels like common
sense, um. Um, THAT'S the negative bias kind of,
um, perpetuating itself. It's the reason why you don't
know it is like because of the negative bias
itself. Um, THAT causes more patterns of disbelief. It
reinforces the tendency to behave in this way. We
tend to kind of, um, we tend to, um,
celebrate one another's rationality, um, for being careful in
these ways, uh, quote unquote careful in these ways
that are actually I think making, um, significant epistemic
errors. Um, I feel like that was a long-winded
answer, um, but did I answer?
Yes, uh, and in regards to justification of belief
in epistemology, there is a very strong inclination to
demand the justification of belief, uh, the idea that
belief is something that stands in need of justification,
that we need to justify our belief. So, is
there a problem with that idea and what kind
of message do we get from talking about beliefs
in terms of whether they are justified?
Yeah, great. This is one of the, this is
one of the connections um that convinced me there's
something ideological going on here, um, because Uh, for
someone, you know, trained in Western epistemology, um, You
know, talking about beliefs being justified is like breathing
air. I mean, it's the most natural thing in
the world, um, and I had sort of forgotten,
um, until I started teaching epistemology to introductory students
that that's not like colloquial language. Um, I need
to when I teach inter epistemology, I need to
explain to my students what we mean by justification.
My students come into the class knowing what knowledge
is and they, uh, um, you know, vaguely, you
know, they know how to use the word, they
know how to use the word belief, um. Um,
JUSTIFICATION needs to be explained. Justification really is a
philosopher's term of art, um, and, um, And I
noticed two things, um, in the course of researching
for this book that surprised me. Um, ONE is
just how recent the ubiquity of justification talk is
in the history of epistemology. Um, IT, it basically
comes in the second half of the 20th century.
It basically, it basically comes out of, um, out
of Geer's paper. It's just about you believe knowledge
I mean. YOU know, there are examples of the
use of that word in, um, in the history
of philosophy going back older than that. Um, BUT,
um, but it's really like post Gettier that epistemologists
started saying things like, um, you know, all beliefs
need to be justified and justification is a necessary
condition for knowledge and things like that. And so
that was one thing that I noticed. Oh, that's
a, that's a recent choice. That means it's contingent.
We could have, we could have settled on different
terminology. Um, INTERESTINGLY enough, like Gtier himself, um, uh,
you know, it's only, it's a two-page paper, um,
everyone talks about the counterexamples in the second page.
I think the first page is more interesting than,
than, um, people realize. Um, THAT'S what he lays
out, um, as he puts it, like 3 different
definitions of knowledge that like all share a common
structure. Only one of those three uses the word
justification. Although it also turns up in his title,
which is I think why why everyone settled um
settled on that way of talking. Um BUT uh
yeah, so the contingency of these the word justification,
and then the normative significance. So I, I also
um have have an interest in like um the
normative um character of language just generally. So, um,
in particular, the presuppositions and stereotypes that attached to
words even when we like don't think of them
as officially part of their meaning and And justification
is a very normatively loaded word. Um, JUSTIFICATION is
a word that outside of epistemology, um, we only
use for things that are like, um, uh, normatively
suspect. So if someone is um um like honking
their horn on the street, um um it's natural
to wonder or to ask or to talk about
whether they have any justification for doing that annoying
thing that they're doing, um. If someone is going
for a walk in the snow, um, um, you
know, on public property, um, no one will ask,
um, what justification do they have for going for
a walk in the snow? Or if they do,
they're like communicating that they have a sort of
unusual, um, set of normative assumptions such that like
they really shouldn't. DOING that. You know, maybe they,
maybe if, if, if it's their boss and like
they, they should be at work. Someone might say,
hey, now, what reason do you have for like
going for a walk in the snow right now.
Um, BUT if, you know, if it's the weekend
and someone's just, you know, going for a casual
stroll, which they have every right to do, no
one's gonna talk about the about the justification of
that action. Um, And this, this is something that,
you know, um, uh, philosophers and other subdisciplines know
well. Um, I've, I've more recently in my career
I been reading a lot more ethics, um, legal
theory, and uh And the idea that, um, uh,
you know, standing in need of justification is for
like things that are presumptively wrong is totally common
in those fields. Um, IN epistemology, um, uh, we
kind of either ignore that or, or, or maybe
more likely um haven't noticed. We, we try to
say, um, um, you know, we mean by, by
epistemic justification we just mean, you know, is there
good evidence for the belief without taking any stance
about like whether um beliefs are presumptively good or
bad. But I think the the stereotypes, the power
that's attached to words runs really deep. And I
think the fact that we go around saying things
like, um, uh, you know, all beliefs stand in
need of justification. Um, IS, um, in a straightforward
way reinforcing this negative bias that I'm worried about.
So the negative bias, um, um, is reinforced because
when you talk about something standing in need of
justification, uh, you're in effect communicating, uh, and in
my view is you're doing this through a, a
semantic presupposition. Um, YOU'RE communicating that the thing is
presumptively bad. Um, YOU only talk about, um, uh,
whether something is or is not justified, um, when
it's the kind of thing that stands in need
of justification. Um, AND, and it's important that it's
a presupposition because that means, you know, someone might
someone might, uh, some, some might say, oh, but
look, uh, epistemologists are, uh, plenty of epistemologists think
that justification is easy to come by, you know,
if you're a reliableist. Then you think like lots
of our beliefs are justified, um, and that's true
and so that's less skeptical than, you know, a
skeptic who says, you know, almost none of your
beliefs, almost none of your beliefs are justified that
that stance is, um, you know, less negatively biased.
But my point is that using the word justification
at all in this very general sense, you know,
talking about talking about whether all beliefs are justified,
itself communicates the idea that all beliefs are suspect.
Only things that are. um, ARE things that it
even makes sense to talk about what they're justified.
If you say that it's justified, that's kind of
like saying, oh, this is the kind of thing
and that like, um, it makes sense to be
suspicious about but don't worry, I've checked it out.
Um, THIS one's OK. Um, AND that, that, um,
you know, that's not being skeptical about that particular
belief, but it's still reinforcing this general suspicion about
belief in a way that I think is perpetuating
the negative bias in epistemology.
So another very common idea is that when moral
and practical stakes are high, there should be pragmatic,
pragmatic encroachment and moral encroachment. What are these two
types of encroachment and is there anything wrong with
them?
Good good. Uh, THIS is a big and complicated
question, uh, part both because the subject matter is
complicated and because my, my attitude toward them is
a little bit subtle, um, but I'll start by
just explaining what, what these ideas are. Um, SO,
uh, this gets back to the distinction that I
was talking about at the beginning of the interview,
um, between, um, like moral norms versus epistemic norms.
So a pretty standard way to um Um, separate
the two, is, is to keep it quite separate,
and you know, these, these are like the purest
traditions in epistemology, um, are ones that keep these
quite separate. So, you know, um, roughly speaking, the
idea would be, um, um, the epistemic norms are
just based on what evidence you have, um, whether
you should believe, um. That he depends on your
on only on the evidence that you have that
bears toward P. It doesn't appear, it doesn't depend
at all on, um, you know, moral considerations, um,
like, um, whether it, um, whether believing P or
disbelieving P would have good or bad effects, um,
or, um, um, you know, respect considerations like whether
it would be um disrespectful towards someone to believe
P or to disbelieve P. That's the kind of
standard separation. Um, um, uh, MORAL encroachment or pragmatic
encroachment, um, are labels for, um, the idea that
the moral or the pragmatic, uh, domains encroach on
epistemology in the sense that the epistemic norms are
sensitive to moral considerations or pragmatic considerations. So for
example, um, um, some pragmatic encroachment theorists have said
that, um, whether you should believe something doesn't just
depend on the evidence, it also depends on how
important it is, um, and in particular, um, they
tend to say it depends on like the cost
of um going wrong. So if, um, Uh, um,
if, um, you're trying to decide uh whether to
believe that this bridge is safe, um, that's, um,
you know, because you're considering, you know, walking over
it with your, with your infants, um. Um, THE
stakes are high and according to pragmatic encroachment theorists,
um, that might sort of raise the evidential bar
that's necessary for reasonable belief. Um, SO maybe if
it were, if it were less important, if your
infants weren't there, um, and, uh, Uh, you know,
the, the fall was a less dangerous fall even
if the evidence about the bridge's safety were the
same, then maybe it would be good to believe
that it's safe. Um, BUT because of the high
stakes, according to this tradition, um, um, uh, you
should be more skeptical now because there's a higher
cost of going wrong, um. Um, AND people said
similar things about, you know, um, um, moral encouragement,
affecting belief in in similar ways. Um, SO is
there anything wrong with that? My, um, my view
in the book is, um, that it, it's, it's
officially neutral on whether there is moral and pragmatic
encroachment, um, but, um, I mean, I I I'll
I'll tell you in order to simplify the complexity
of my explanation here. I'm actually pretty suspicious. Of,
of the whole thing. I'm, I'm inclined toward thinking
um that um the the purest idea is, is
more correct and and encroachment is, is wrong of
all kinds. But that's not something I try to
argue for in the book. Um, I, I, what
I, what I argue for in the book is
that, um, is I guess two things. One is,
um, the standard discourse around moral and pragmatic encroachment
also exemplifies this negative bias. Um, um, uh, AND,
um, and to, uh, if you want to be
an encroachment theorist, you should have a more symmetrical
view. So let me explain what I mean. Um,
uh, GO back to that bridge case, um, the,
the normal way to be a pragmatic encroachment theorist
is to say, um, oh, when the, um, Um,
when the stakes are higher, when the cost of
a mistake, um, is more significant, then you should
be more skeptical. Well, that only makes sense, um,
on the assumption, which I think everyone's making, but
few are even bothering to state that, um, the
only relevant kind of mistake you could be worried
about is the mistake of a bad belief. So,
um, and, and you know, that example that I
gave was sort of designed to elicit that set
of assumptions. You're, you're standing there with your kid,
considering whether to cross the bridge, considering whether the
bridge is safe. And um in many normal circumstances,
um, uh, you know, if you're deciding should I
believe, should I not believe, um, if you, um,
if you believe when you were wrong, um, then,
uh, the bridge might break on you and you'll
get seriously injured, you and your kid, um, and
that's You know, that's the bad thing that people
worry about. Um, AND if you make the converse
mistake, which many people don't even register as a
possible mistake, the mistake of suspending judgment when actually
there wasn't good enough evidence to believe, um, then,
well, you know, you didn't get to cross the
bridge. Maybe you have to walk around or maybe
you just go a different way, and it's like
not that big a deal. And there's plenty of
cases that are like that. Um, BUT assuming that
all cases are like that is in effect, um,
to assume, um, that like, um, the, um, the
thing that will happen if you don't form a
belief, which is typically, you know, the thing that
we kind of interpret as not acting, letting things,
uh, proceed as they are, um, if we assume
that that's always gonna be fine, then that negative
bias makes sense. Um, SO this is the sense
in which I think, um, this negative bias in
epistemology tends to perpetuate a certain kind of status
quo bias, a certain kind of conservatism, um, um,
uh, if, um, the only thing you're worried. WORRIED
about is the worry that when you intervene, you're
gonna like mess things up um based on a
bad belief that you had, um, then that motivates
um being more skeptical. But if, as is often
the case, you should be worried about what happens
if you don't do something. Um, IF, um, the
status quo is not a great situation, and, um,
failing to form the belief that you should have
wasn't merely a missed opportunity to do something good,
um, but, um, something that is actually quite costly,
um, um, then, um, the sort of incentive structure
is reversed, and I argue in the book that
if you want to be a pragmatic encroachment theorist
or moral encroachment theorist, then in those cases, Um,
um, you should, um, if you want to be
an encroachment theorist, you should do it symmetrically. So
in some cases, like the ones people focus on,
um, uh, the higher stakes, um, or the moral
cost should push you toward, um, um, skepticism. But
in other cases where the, the, um, the bad
thing that might happen is what happens if you
don't. Believe, um, then maybe if you want to
be an encroachment theorist, you should think that the
moral or practical pressures should push you away from
skepticism towards belief. So there should be cases where,
um, these, uh, pragmatic or moral considerations, um, um,
lower the evidential bar, um, for permissible belief or
even for required belief. Um, SO like, you know,
what are the kinds of cases that might be
like that? Well, um, Um, I think one set
of examples, um, uh, uh, come up pretty naturally
from some of the, um, like, um, agnotology, motivated
ignorance, literature, um, um, manufactured skepticism about kind of,
um, big, complicated, harmful stuff that we need to,
uh, that we need to, um, react. In dramatic
ways to, and climate change is like the um
is a famous example and a and a really
great example um so corporate interests are, um, uh,
you know, the, the um fossil fuel industry um
has an interest in, uh, uh, the status quo
even though it's, um, seriously, um, um, contributing to
suffering uh in the world through climate change, um.
And, um, uh, you know, shifting our energy infrastructure,
um, away from, um, these, you know, carbon-emitting fuel
sources, um. It is complicated and difficult and requires
um tremendous um political motivation and energy um and
a really effective way to stop that from happening
if you're the fossil fuel industry is to make
people feel not quite sure about it, to cause
doubt. Um, AND, uh, you know, the fact that
there's all this negative bias around that I'm talking
about, um, makes that easier in lots of ways.
Um. Um, BUT given the practical situation that we're
in, um, uh, the cost of the status quo
is tremendous, um, the cost of like not doing
anything, and that's what will happen if you continue
to suspend judgment. Um, SO maybe this is the
kind of consideration where the kind of situation, um,
where if you believe in pragmatic encroachment, moral or
moral encroachment, um, uh, that encroachment should actually make
you less skeptical, not more, um, because it's, uh,
because like the, the, the more harmful. The whole
thing is um letting us stay on the course
that we're on right now. Um, OTHER quite different
kinds of cases that come up in the literature,
um, you know, I mentioned one reason people have
been interested in moral encroachment has to do with
like questions about respect. Um, SO, um, if you
would, um, um, this comes up especially in like
some of the literature on like beliefs based on
statistical generalizations. So if someone believes, um, Uh, if
someone knows that, you know, most of the, um,
women in this office are part of the administrative
staff, um, as opposed to, um, um, lawyers, um.
Um, AND you see a woman, uh, maybe on
statistical grounds, uh, uh, that might like tempt you
to believe that this is probably a staff member,
not a lawyer, um, but some people said, oh
no, that's, that would be like disrespectful, even though,
um, the evidence supports it. Both sides of that
are controversial. I'm not sure what I think about
it, but I, but I'm just mention this as
a, as an illustration. Um, um, um, uh. If
that's right, then I think there are also gonna
be cases where you disrespect someone by suspending judgment.
And actually we do know this, like in one
domain, it's not super connected to this literature for
whatever reason, um, but one place where this comes
up, um, um, in the epistemic literature all the
time is, um, in testimonial injustice, right? So, uh,
testimonial injustice, um, um, from Miranda Fricker's book of
Epistemic injustice, um, happens when, uh, Um, you give
someone undue doubts and, uh, so someone, you know,
tells you something and you give them the credibility
to it. You don't believe them as much as
like they deserve to be believed. Um, WELL, that's,
that's being, you know, um, too skeptical. And, uh,
Fricker points out, uh, which is, you know, common
sense, um, that that's not merely an epistemic mistake.
Um, THERE'S something disrespectful about that. There's a kind
of moral injustice happening here, um, and I think
that's right. Um, WELL, if you're a moral encroachment
theorist who thinks that, you know, um, um, the
moral status of your dtastic choices, um, should like
push you toward the thing that, um, um, doesn't
do the moral injury, then testimonial injustice should also
push you for like uh very similar kinds of
uh respect engaging reasons towards belief. Now, yeah, I'm,
I'm kind of suspicious about this whole, this whole
thing. I, I think really if I, uh, if
you want to know what's deep in my heart,
I think probably both moral encroachment and pragmatic encroachment
are, are not correct. Um, BUT in the book,
what I argue is that if you want to
believe in these things, um, don't just believe on
the skeptical side, um, sometimes they push the other
direction, um, as well.
So, now let me ask you just before we
get into epistemic courage, what is epistemic faith and
what would be some illustrative examples where epistemic faith
is proper and necessary?
OK. Um. So, yeah, faith is another one of
these words. People use it to mean a lot
of different things. Um, um, I do think Um,
It's a mistake to think of faith as being
sort of extra evidential by definition. You know, some
people talk about, oh yeah, faith is, uh, faith
is when you believe something that um that there's
not evidence for, um, and you know I I
do think some faith is like that, some misplaced
faith is like that, um, but, um, but I
don't think that's the, that's the general criterion and
here's why, um. I mentioned, I mentioned before that
um. One of the traits I'm really interested in
is this trait of, uh, uh, you know, um,
being confident at the right time at the right
times and doubting at the right times, and that,
and that's hard, um, um. There are many things
um that can make us uh that can tempt
us to doubt even when um that doubt would
be a mistake. Um, um, THIS is what happens
when you do have enough evidence, um, but something
makes you feel not quite sure. There's a mismatch
between like the psychological certainty and the epistemic status.
And this can happen in all kinds of domains.
I, I, uh, in my chapter. On faith, um,
I, I really try to pull from a really
wide variety of, uh, deeply different kinds of examples.
So, uh, you know, one kind of example, um,
um, just has to do with, um, uh, the
dialectic with radical skeptics. So, you know, as people
who have studied epistemology know, um, like refuting the
skeptic on their own terms without begging central questions,
um, is extremely difficult, and many, uh, epistemologists, myself
included, think that um there's a sense in which
that's not possible. Um, BUT that doesn't make us
skeptics, um, that makes us say, uh, yeah, sometimes
the only correct thing is the question begging thing,
um, um, and, uh, you know, that's a, that's
a Sort of, um, epistemically disquieting in fact, um,
but I think it is a normative epistemic fact.
I, I, I, I do think that it's correct
to rely on some like, um, question that argue,
for example, like I'm a, I'm a, I'm a
neoorian about perception. I, I think that like GE
Moore's proof the external world is a pretty good
proof, um, you know, you see hands out hands,
therefore there are um external, um, objects blatantly question
begging against certain kinds of skeptics, um, or idealists,
which was, um. Which was more target, um. Um,
BUT still I think epistemically appropriate. So when you
focus on the like, um, the question beggings of
it, um, that feels sort of disappointing, like we,
we like to have arguments that um would compel
our interlocutors, um. Um, I think, you know, this,
this is not uncontroversial, uh, in this instance, but
I think that, um, uh, the, the correct response
to that felt uncertainty, um, is to get over
it. Uh, I think that, uh, yeah, you know,
it, it would be nice if I had an
argument that, um, would convince someone who didn't have
some of my starting points, but the fact that
I don't isn't a reason for me to doubt
myself. That's, that's what I think about external perception,
um, and, you know, that's generally what kind of
new Marines think about that. Um. Um, LET me
give a couple more pretty different kinds of examples.
Um, um. Fundamental, um, reasoning, logic, a um a
priori investigation. Um, HERE it's maybe more obvious that
like the justification of some of our foundational logical,
uh, reasoning, um, would have to be question begging
against someone who doubted it because you can't reason
about anything without reasoning, so. If you're justifying reasoning,
um, you're gonna have a reason to do it.
So like, you know, you can, uh why is
inferring according to modus opponents, um, OK. Well, I,
I can give, like, uh, I can give a
soundness proof of that reasoning. I can, I can
argue for why, um, inferring according to this method
will never take you from something true to something
false. Um, BUT, um, that explanation that I gave.
It's gonna use conditional reasoning. It's gonna have moduponents
in it. Um, uh, WHEN, when you notice that,
um, that can also make you feel bad. And
a lot of the like, um, uh, epistemology of
the a priori, um, is about, OK, so like
what, what do we do instead, um, or do
we, you know, learn to live with that badness.
Again, kind of like my, you know, Mauren stance
about perception. I, I, um. Um, I learned to
live with that kind of, um, feeling of disappointment.
I don't think it actually is a genuine kind
of epistemic badness. I think for, um, general structural
reasons, um, um, uh, the constraints that you should
never be, you should never be allowed to rely
on something that, um, a certain kind of luck
you wouldn't wouldn't accept, um, it is just a,
it's just a false, um, principle. It's obvious, it
leads immediately to very radical skepticism if you take
it in generality, um. But I also think something
very similar to this happens in extremely different kinds
of cases. So those were like kind of, uh,
you know, traditional epistemology kinds of cases, foundational epistemology
kind of stuff. Um, I think this happens in
like more socially interesting cases too. Um, SO, um,
think about gaslighting. Um, SO when, so gaslighting works
by, um, sort of, um, pressuring someone into doubting
something that they have excellent reason to believe, um.
Uh, YOU know, uh, you know, in the, well,
you know, why don't, why don't we take the
actual, um, Um, um, um, eponymous, um, example, um,
from the, from the play in the movie Gaslight,
um, the protagonist there, you know, sees the lights
dimming and her abusive husband, um, uh, basically tells
her, no, don't trust your eyes, uh, you're wrong
about that, um, and, um, uh, encourages her to
doubt herself for his own selfish reasons. Um, OK,
so, um, uh, uh, and gas lighters, you know,
uh, have many, um, Skills, um, they use, um,
um, psychological, um, Knowledge to, you know, poke people
in ways that do tend to um successfully cause
this kind of doubt. That said, uh, you know,
humans aren't robots. There's not like a button that
you can push that just kind of, um, is
the doubt button that's guaranteed to cause someone to
to doubt and give up. Um, WHEN you're, when,
when someone is, um, um, if someone is exposed
to a gaslighting attempt, um, they, uh, they have
some, some of their psychology is relevant for what's
gonna happen, uh, as a result. Um, AND sometimes,
um, someone tries to gaslight you and you resist
it. You, you can kind of feel the, you
can feel the impulse cause they're, they're they're skilled
at pushing buttons that really do kind of make
you question yourself, um, but here's a possible thing
that could happen. Um, YOU think about it, you,
you see, oh, should I really, do I really
remember that clearly? Should I trust myself about this?
Um, A possible thing that you can do, and
sometimes a good thing that you can do is
to answer yes, you can resist the gaslighting. That
I think, um, is also a clear instance of
epistemic faith. Um, ALL of these cases are cases
where you have some sort of like natural felt
dissatisfaction with your um epistemic investigation, um, what, um,
Jennifer Nagle calls epistemic anxiety. Um, AND sometimes when
you have epistemic anxiety, that's a good clue that
you should, you should keep investigating. But sometimes when
you have epistemic anxiety, um, uh, that's just cause
you're being anxious even though you, you had plenty
of evidence. Um, AND when you rely on your
own judgments, um, even though, um, you have this
kind of feeling, um, maybe manufactured or maybe just
kind of because of the general structure of the
dialectic of, uh, dissatisfaction of uncertainty, um, even though
you have that feeling, you can say, no, I
have enough evidence, I'm gonna trust it and you
can be right about that. When that happens, um,
you are, um, exhibiting proper epistemic faith. Epistemic faith
is when you believe despite this kind of, um,
temptation toward a feeling of uncertainty, and, you know,
sometimes that's bad that you shouldn't, you shouldn't put
epistemic faith, um, in things that you don't have
enough evidence for. Um, BUT sometimes, uh, sometimes you
do have evidence and you should continue to have
faith anyway. Um, GIVE me just one more example.
This one's like from the cover of my book,
um, this is the Grand Canyon Skywalk. Um, SO,
um, uh, it's a, it's a bridge over the
Grand Canyon that has a transparent bottom. And, uh,
when people, you know, walk out over it, um,
they have plenty of evidence that it's perfectly safe.
Um, uh, uh, YOU know, it's been manufactured very
carefully and people go over it all the time,
and, you know, it's never fallen while someone's on
it. It's just not a thing that happens. Um,
BUT there are very normal psychological mechanisms. When you
walk out and you look down and you see
the Grand Canyon and like stretched up below you,
um, that tends to make you, um, uh, feel
afraid. um, AND, you know, there's, there's, you know,
there, there's fear of falling, but that can get
into your belief too, right? And sometimes that can
motivate you to, to doubt whether it's safe. That,
that might make you say, oh, maybe I should
like, um, um, watch 10 more people go. Before
I'm confident about it, that I think would be
incorrect. You have plenty of evidence already, um, um,
trusting, um, your, um, assessment of the situation, um,
which was correct in the first place and based
on good evidence, um, uh, despite the existence of,
you know, reasonable pressure towards doubt, um, is, uh,
when epistemic faith is good. Sorry, that was a
long answer to, but yeah.
So let's talk then about epistemic courage, the central
topic of the book. What is epistemic courage then
and how does it relate to moral
courage? OK. So actually having just explained, um, epistemic
faith, um, it's relatively simple to kind of state
what epistemic courage is in my view. Um, EPISTEMIC
courage, epistemic courage is the tendency to um have
epistemic faith in the right circumstances. Um, SO I
mentioned at the beginning, I think of it on
the kind of Aristotelian virtue model, um, there's a
mean between two vices. So, um, um, there's one
epistemic vice of epistemic recklessness where you're not paying
attention to to the evidence and you're just kind
of believing things, uh, without regard for whether, um,
whether it's a bad belief, um. And, um, and
you know, that's the thing that like mainstreamistemology is
mostly focused on. Don't be epistemically reckless. Um, BUT
there's an opposite vice that hasn't gotten enough attention,
and that's what I call epistemic cowardice, um, and
that's when you, um, you don't have epistemic faith
in the cases when you should. Um, ANYTIME. Um,
YOUR belief is challenged, or anytime you notice the
respect in which, uh, you know, you, um, could
have investigated more, you feel like, oh, I shouldn't
make up my mind. I should continue suspending judgment.
I just don't feel sure about that. Um, THAT'S,
uh, that's the mistake of kind of bad suspending
judgment, and that's the mistake that like my book
is trying to, it's trying to be uh corrective
about. Um, SO epistemic courage is, um, is the
virtuous mean between the two. SO someone has epistemic
courage to the extent to which, um, they don't
make either one of those mistakes. Uh, AND this
is very parallel to, um, you know, at least
like an Aristotelian understanding of moral courage. So moral
courage is, um, uh, is, um, you know, Feeling
and being guided by um the correct uh amount
of fear. Um, YOU don't want to be reckless
and, you know, be doing stupid dangerous things all
the time. Uh, THAT'S not courage, that's recklessness. Um,
YOU, you also don't want to be, um, cowardly
and never take any chances. Or never do anything
that you like, uh, you know, feel might be
a little bit dangerous. Uh, YOU want to have
a well calibrated sense of what you're capable of,
and you want to, um, subject yourself to the,
um, the correct to the amount of danger that's
kind of justified by the practical situations that you're
in. Um, THAT'S what moral encourages. Epistemic courage is
uh just the analog to that in the Dotastic
realm. Um, SO you aren't too skeptical, you aren't
too gullible, um, you have a good accurate sense
of your own, um, dotastic capacities, um, and the
evidential situation such that, um, you are good at
recognizing those points where you know enough to form
a belief. Mhm.
So, an illustrative example of what you explored in
the book in regards to negative epistemic bias, skepticism,
and epistemic faith is the case of testimony and
rape culture. Could you tell us about it and
how we can achieve epistemic courage in this particular
case?
Good, thanks. Yeah, that's an extended case study that
that I that I used late in the book.
And um in some ways, it's a, it's a
really good example. In some ways it's, it's, it's
a more complicated in some ways. I guess I
don't want to say it's a bad example, but
it's it's a complicated example, um, um, because the
things that I want to say about it, um,
well, are complicated, um, uh, part of the reason,
um, that I use that example is as a
historical matter, um, thinking about testimony and rape culture,
um, is kind of what got me, um, to
this project in the first place in a way
it was a generalization of it. So maybe I'll,
um, I'll trace you through some of my own
um um history of reasoning through these kinds of
things. So I, I started um a number of
years ago, a project on testimony and skepticism and
rape culture, um, um, just based on this kind
of, um, relatively simple, um, um, and good but
incomplete observation that, um. That quite often um people
respond with undue skepticism to sexual assault complaints. And,
uh, uh, you know, this was, um, this was
made super famous um um during the Me Too
movement. Um, THE profession of academic philosophy got a
little bit of a head start a few years
before that, we had some high profile cases of,
um, uh, you know, um, students or former students
discussing misconduct by, by their professors and um some
of that discourse was like playing out in the
philosophy blogs in ways that, um, seems to me.
Both kind of um morally harmful in obvious ways,
but epistemically interesting. People were, you know, this, this
rhetoric of, oh, you know, people are innocent until
proven guilty or it's a he said she said
situation and you know, we shouldn't jump to conclusions,
um, you know, I, I, I saw that that
was um harmful. I saw that it was like
epistemically wrong, but absolutely wrong, epistemically wrong in a
kind of interesting way, which made me want to
like um uh dig into that in, in more
detail. And so my early work on that topic,
um, was really, um, about, um, you know, moving
away from the negative mistake there. Basically, I noticed,
so people are making complaints that are credible, that,
you know, amount to really strong evidence, um. But,
um, too many people are, uh, being skeptical about
them, um, motivated in part by deference to the
status quo, deference to existing power, um, you know,
not wanting to rock the boat, things like that.
And those, those themes are definitely, um, uh, still
major themes in, in like the, the book that
I've written here. Um, THE big thing that changed,
um, and complexified the story for me, um. Between
some of my earlier work on that topic and
and the chapter that I've written in this book,
um, is, um, an appreciation for, um, especially the,
the Intersectional complexity of um questions about um sexual
assault and testimony and credibility. Um, SO, um uh
one big piece of the problem, um, was that
kind of undue skepticism, um, and I was focusing
on these cases where you have You know, these,
these were, these are kind of um the cases
that are um most prevalent in the public imagination,
uh, where you have kind of a, a high
status individual, typically a man um who is running
um a subordinate or a student or someone in
a, in a position of of relative, um, powerlessness,
um, and, and I think in those cases the
dynamic does play out and basically the way that
it was focused on, um. But as I was
reading more about um rape culture and testimony um
and credibility, I was reminded that there's a really
important sort of other side of this, um, uh,
which is that, um, in some cases, um, that
people are extremely credulous about, um, misconduct allegations, and
those are cases where um the uh Um, the,
the power and the privilege, um, um, are, are
flipped from the kinds of cases, the examples that
I talked about earlier. Um, SO, uh, you know,
the, the most obvious instance of this, um, is
the, um, historical um prevalence of, um, uh, of,
um, you know, credulous and violent responses to white
women accusing black men of sexual misconduct. um. Uh,
ESPECIALLY like, you know, in the American 20th century,
uh, early 20th century, um, but, um, you know,
much more broadly as well. Um. So this made
me realize and this kind of um uh helps
um the chapter that was developing um fit into
some of the dialect about courage as a sort
of wisdom requiring Aristotelian mean. Um, THIS made it
really vivid that uh the solution to the undue
skepticism that I. NOTICING about um sexual misconduct allegations
can't be anything remotely as simple as like turning
up the credibility dial. Um, WE won't make things
better if we just kind of um uh reflexively
increase the degree to which we um uh um
believe all um sexual misconduct allegations, um. That that
might make some of the cases that I started
by thinking about um better um but it would
make these other kinds of cases um worse, um,
with sexual assault testimony just like anything else, um,
uh, you need, you need to pay attention to
both sides. You need to, uh, not have bad
beliefs and you need to not have bad suspect
or judgment, um, and you know, both things are
happening, um, uh, both things are happening like quite
a bit. So, um, reflecting on, um, the intersectional
complexity of these questions about, um, what degree of
credibility should be offered, um, really drove home to
me how um How subtle um the um the
virtue of epistemic courage has to be. Like really,
if the virtue is, um, um, being credible at
the right time, being credible when you should, and
doubting um when you should doubt, um, that requires,
um, a lot of um social understanding that requires
sensitivity to these intersectional considerations and that requires, um,
you know, attention to the particulars of the situation
that one is in. Uh, THERE'S no like, you
know, one simple trick to, to doing a good
job here. Um, um, AND, and, you know, in
this, in this particular example, like I was mentioning,
I think mistakes on both sides are quite common.
There, you know, there's cowardice in some circumstances, there's
recklessness in other circumstances, and both of those are
really serious moral harms. Um, SO courage is, um,
courage is difficult. Courage is, uh, requires a lot
of knowledge, it requires a lot of wisd. It
requires a lot of attention to these kinds of
complexities. I think it requires a lot of, uh,
um, you know, understanding of the ideological forces that
are at play, the patriarchal ones, the white supremacist
ones, um, and, um, uh, that, that's kind of
what it takes to do a good job recognizing
when there is and there is not enough evidence
to form belief.
So I would like to talk a little bit
about the context now before we get into the
last topic of our conversation today. So that was
about the idea of epistemic contextualism or the idea
that the language we use to talk about knowledge
is context sensitive and how it contributes to truth
conditions.
Good, yeah. So, uh, this is something that I
would, I focused on a lot earlier in my
career, and my, my previous book before this one
was really all about epistemic contextualism. Um, uh, SO
epistemic contextualism is, um, it's a linguistic view. It's
the idea that the language we use to talk
about epistemic matters and, and I, like many contextualists
focus on the word nose, um, um, is context
sensitive. So language context sensitive, that means that in
different conversational contexts, um, we use it to um
um contribute importantly different things to um the meaning
of what is said. So, um, uh, to take,
uh, you know, the simplest kinds of examples of
context sensitive language that everybody understands are indexicals, words
like I or you or here or now. Um,
THESE are all context-sensitive words, um, which means that,
um, you know, uh, uh, if two different people
say the, the same sentence, you know, if I,
if I say, um, um. I wrote a book
called Epistemic Courage. Um, WHAT I, what I say,
if I say that sentence is something true, namely
that that I, Jonathan, wrote a book called Epistemic
Courage. Um, IF you uttered that very same sentence,
you'd be saying something quite different, um, and unless
you have a different book that I don't know
about, it would be false. Um, um, SO the
word I is a context sensitive word. It contributes
to the truth conditions of sentences in different ways
in different conversational contexts. Epistemic contextualists, and I'm one
of them, um, think that the word nose is
in one interesting sense, similar to the word I,
um, in this respect. Uh, SO, um, I think
that, um, in different conversational contexts, um, the word
knows expresses an epistemic relation that requires like different
kinds of standards for, um, for evidence, basically. So,
um, there are very skeptical conversational. Contexts where we
use the word nose in a way that's quite
strong such that it's difficult to count as uh
as as knowing um and uh in other contexts,
um, we use it in a much more lax
way. This is uh a bit analogous, maybe another,
another analogy that would be useful to to put
on the table, um, is the way that um
Gradeable adjectives work. So, um, you know, tall is
a gradable adjective. Um, HOW tall do you have
to be to count as tall, um, is also
a matter that is sort of settled from context
to context. Um, SO if you're talking, you know,
famously, if you're talking about basketball players, someone who's
6' 3 might not count as tall, but if
you're talking about philosophers, someone who's 6'3 is a
tall person. Um. Uh, OK, so, so I think
contextualism, um, is, um, is also true about the
word nose, um, which means, um, that, uh, you
know, um, sentences like, um, oh I don't know,
um. Um, uh, WHAT'S a, what's a good example?
Um, I, um, I know that my, um, dog
is downtown right now. Um, um. Whether that sentence
is true um might depend on how skeptical a
conversation um we're having. Um, SO, you know, I
do have quite strong evidence that she's downtown, um,
um, um, but, um, you know, something surprising might
have happened, um, you know, I haven't, I, I
haven't looked at my phone in the last hour,
um, so, so, you know, um, maybe, uh, maybe
someone took her away, um, um. Um, SO in
some, in some conversational contexts that might be um
a serious enough, uh, you know, counter possibility for
me to not count as knowing, and others, um,
it doesn't. That by itself, um, uh, you know,
everything I've just been saying in response to, to
your question, um, um, has been, um, a bit
like orthogonal to the main themes of, of my
book, um, but it's, it's important background for the
last chapter of my book, which, um, which points
to ways in which if you're an epistemic contextualist,
um, that negative bias can can have harmful effects
at the linguistic level. So if you think as
I do, that there can be more or less
skeptical conversational contexts, um, uh, and that can influence
whether sentences ascribing knowledge, um, are actually true or
not. Then, um, there's a sort of, um, additional
way addition to the ones I was talking about
way back at the beginning, in which the like
the ideological negative bias and epistemology can like, um,
can make itself be true. Um, IT can cause
people to speak in more skeptical contexts, um, um,
and accurately deny that someone knows something, um. Even
though they could have, and maybe they should have
spoken in a less skeptical context um where um
they would have counted as knowing. And the reason
that can be, that can make a practical difference
is that your choice of an episthetic standard um
suggests in, in some way and uh you know,
I'm neutral about this about just the mechanics in
the book. My my previous book, um, contextualizing Knowledge
has has a particular proposal, but, um, but I
think everyone should agree that choosing a more skeptical
conversational standard, um, somehow communicates the idea. That like
that threshold for knowledge is the one that matters.
Um, AND, um, and if it, if that's false,
if actually your practical situation was one where a
lower standard would have been appropriate. Um, THEN you
can, you can say, hey, you don't know that.
And you can express the truth because contextualism um
has this kind of flexibility. We accommodate the um
the linguistic um uh conversational context, um, in order
to make the sentence come out as being true.
um, BUT you're sending this false message that, you
know, you shouldn't do this thing, uh, you should,
um, uh, maybe even you shouldn't believe, um, um,
because you're sending the message that, um, the threshold
for appropriate belief is higher than it actually is.
Um, AND one interesting thing about that is it
means that, um, uh, it's another way in which
the bias is stealthy, it's another way in which
the problem can hide, because you can't solve this
problem by um focusing on the truth of what
people say. If you complain about someone making a
too skeptical utterance, um, if, uh, contextual, if epidemic
contextualism is right, um, if you complain about someone
choosing a bar for knowledge that's too high and
saying, oh, you don't know that, um, they have
this really rhetorically powerful retort available, namely, well, no,
what I said is true. Um, AND, and according
to like contextualism, they might well be right about
that. Um, SO to explain what went wrong there,
you have to, um, you have to kind of
get under the hood of the language a bit.
You have to understand contextualism and you have to
understand the ways that these pragmatic, um, ideas get
conveyed, um. And since these things are, uh, you
know, not obvious, not widely understood. I mean, you
know, they're, it's controversial even though they're true, but
I think they're true. Um, CERTAINLY since it's controversial,
that means, you know, not everyone, um, knows that
they're true. um. Um, uh, THAT, that, that's another
respect in which, um, this, uh, negative bias can
operate to perpetuate itself kind of, um, in this,
in this hidden way, and that's another respect in
which in which it's ideological.
OK, so on that precise topic, what is contextual
injustice and how does it relate to the ways
the negative bias can play out?
All right, good. Um, SO yeah, contextual injustice is
my label for um doing that bad kind of
thing I was just describing. So contextual injustice is
what happens when someone picks a conversational standard, when
someone sets the the parameters in the context, um,
in a way that's, you know, that successfully influences
the truth conditions of, of their utterances, um, but,
um, but is unjust, um. And why might it
be unjust? Well, um, um, one way, uh, you
know, the most obvious kinds of ways for my
purposes in the book, um, are by communi communicating
the idea that, um, uh, there's, you know, not
enough evidence for, for some particular purpose by setting
a high threshold for knowledge. Um, SO maybe, uh,
maybe thinking more about testimonial and justice cases would
be, um, would be eliminating here. Um, IF, um,
If um someone tells me, oh actually we can
go to a, we can go to, we can
go to a sexual assault allegation if um If
someone tells me, um. That um there, uh, someone
comes to me as department head and says that
their a student comes and says that their instructor,
um, uh, sexually harassed them. Um, IF, um, and
they, and they give me, um, you know, um,
uh, a fair amount of evidence, uh, corroborating that,
um, but, you know, given the nature of these
things, you know, they didn't show me a video
of it happening, um, it's the kind of situation
where, um, uh, you know, it's certainly possible and
natural to, um, to have doubt and have questions.
Um, BUT let's imagine a version of the case
where, um, I have enough evidence where It would
be reasonable for me to believe, um, and, um,
and I could, um, uh, very reasonably speak um
in conversational contexts where I would count as knowing
that that um sexual harassment um has occurred. If
instead I pick a higher standard for knowledge, um,
if I say, uh, uh, you know, if I
speak in a context where like, you know, testimony
in general can't provide knowledge, um, I, you know,
I think contexts like that are possible. Um, YOU
know, I'd say, oh well, you know, I, I,
I know that you've told me that, um, but
since I wasn't there, I don't have first personal
knowledge, uh, you know, there's possible scenarios where you
could have been lying, so I don't really know
whether that's true. Um. According to contextualism, I, I
could say all those things and express truths. Um,
BUT I think under the circumstances, you know, depending
on exactly how this, this case is spelled out,
um, there's possible versions of this story, um, where
it would be morally wrong for me to use
a standard like that. Um, IT would communicate, uh,
distrust of the student, it would, um, tend to,
um, it would tend to suggest. Um, IN action,
um, so I'm not gonna do anything about it
because I don't know whether it's true. Um, AND
I think that that is, that would be an
abdication of my responsibilities. Um, I think that, um,
I owe it to the student in this scenario,
um, to, uh, take the testimony seriously, and part
of the way that I would do that is
by choosing an appropriate contextual standard so that we
can talk about it in a way that uh
communicates, um, that, um, that it's credible. Um, SO
epidemic uh contextual injustice is unjustly choosing the wrong
contextual parameter. Um, YOU can do that with, uh,
the bar for knowledge if you're contexious about knowledge.
It's a more general notion too, so I have
a, I, I have a, um, excuse me. I
have a paper um um that discusses contextual justice,
um, uh, with a couple of central examples. One
is the knowledge example that I focused on in
the book, um, but I also talk in that
paper about gender terms, um, so, um, uh, I,
I, I think there may be a, uh, a
strong case to be made that, um, gender terms.
Might also be context sensitive, um, in particular, there
might be trans-inclusive, um, ways of speaking and trans-exclusive
ways of speaking, um, and I think for, uh,
you know, general, uh, moral intersectional reasons that, um,
in, uh, um, most contexts, uh, maybe, maybe all
contexts, um, the, uh, trans inclusive. Ways are the
better ways to speak and that it's unjust to
uh speak in these other ways, um, but, um,
but I don't think it's impossible to use these
words to express um trans exclusionary, um, you know,
gender ideas. Um, I think, um, often that would
be an example of an injustice too, um, and
once you have the general framework, I think that,
um, um. Contextual injustice can happen in quite a
wide variety of areas. Only some of them have
to do with like the central themes about the
negative bias and epistemology here, which is why I
focus on the bar for knowledge in this book.
One last question, uh, how should we approach phenomena
like misinformation and conspiracy theories then, uh, and aren't
those cases where a negative bias should prevail?
Good. Uh, THIS is a very common thought. Um,
I, uh, to some degree, I want to resist
it. I mean, I, so, like I said at
the beginning, um, I do think, um, the negative
side is important, um, the positive side is too.
Uh, I focus on the positive side because the
negative side gets plenty of attention. Um. Um, And
I certainly think that there are examples of mistakes
that people make with respect to misinformation and conspiracy
theories, um, where focusing on the negative side of
the story is, is, uh, is the correct thing
to explain. Um, BUT I actually don't think that's
the norm. I don't think that's the typical case.
Um, uh, EVEN though, um, I recognize that it's
very natural to think that. So, so this, this
I think is, is one of the, uh, less
obvious or more surprising things that I think. Um,
In the public imagination, the problem with say conspiracy
theories, um, actually both conspiracy theories and misinformation, is
that people believe them too easily. Um, uh. When
you talk about like conspiracy theorists, like if you
look up definitions of like what it is to
be a conspiracy theorist, um, uh, you'll typically see,
oh, you know, it's someone who like believes in
these certain kinds of um of uh conspiracies despite
um they're not being um strong evidence for them.
Um, But in fact, when I look around at
the problems, the conspiracy theories and misinformation are raising,
um, I think that quite a lot of the
time the problems that they cause are um uh
problems of undue skepticism, not undue belief, um. It's
possible to read, um, you know, that, um, you
know that. COVID vaccines are doing a 5G thing
that's like, um, part of a nebulous global conspiracy.
It's possible to believe that and I'm sure some
people do believe that, and since there's not good
evidence for it, that that belief would be a
mistake of the kind that negativeismology is about, um,
but, um, by far the more common thing that
happens, I think it's just like every um vaccine
skeptic I've talked to that was worried. About these
kinds of things. Um, uh, THEY, they're thinking about
these, um, conspiracy theories in, um, a doubt kind
of framing. They say, well, I'm not really sure
what to think, um, but I've heard, um, uh,
you know, these bad theories, these bad hypotheses, and,
um, I've also heard, you know, the government telling
me that it's fine. Um, BUT like I'm just
not that comfortable putting something in my body without
being pretty sure that um it's not gonna, uh,
you know, turn me into a 5G zombie, um.
And if that's what people are saying, and I
think on the whole that is like the more
common thing that's out there, um, if that's what
people are saying, then uh that's a problem of
bad suspension of judgment, not a problem of bad
belief, because they're not believing they're they're like, uh,
you know, they're taking it more seriously than I
want them to, uh, but it's not they just
like accept that it's true, um, um, it's that
they're accepting it as a life hypothesis, but accepting
more life hypotheses that just is kind of keeping
the question open, um, and so. This is part
of why it's so important I think to uh
notice um that there's two sides to this and
and to uh two sides to epistemology and uh
recognize that it's important to focus on the positive
side, because if you're only focused on the negative,
the way that like so many people are. And
if you, to my mind, falsely believe that um
the problem with conspiracy theories is that people believe
them too easily. Um, THEN you're gonna reach for
a solution that pushes toward more skepticism. You're gonna
say, OK, hey everybody, um, make sure you don't
get duped. Make sure you like check your sources.
Make sure you like get more evidence, uh, before
you form beliefs. Um, AND for the kind of
person that I'm talking about who has heard these
theories and isn't sure what to think, um, and,
uh, just has kind of doubt about the whole
thing, and so wants to like, you know, quote
unquote, play it safe by not getting the vaccine,
for that kind of person, the hey, don't be
too gullible advice is exactly the opposite advice what
they need. Um, uh, CAUSE their problem in the
first place was, um, they, um, haven't, um, recognized
that there's compelling evidence, um, for, um, the kind
of, you know, standard story about the, uh, in
this case, the vaccines, um, being more skeptical would
make things worse, not better. Um. Um, Misinformation, this,
this may be even more conspicuous, uh, and again
I think, I think people just often don't, um,
quite, um, think clearly enough about, um, uh, or,
or just think enough about uh the mechanics of
how this works, you know, there, there's this, uh,
simple idea, oh, someone, uh, you know, saw a
story from a fake news source, and then they
believed it and that's the problem. And yeah, sometimes
that's the problem. Um, BUT a lot of the
misinformation, um, is there, I mean, and, and this
is really, you know, um, there's good sociological research
about, about, about this. It's intended not to be
believed, but to just kind of, uh, throw up
so much, so much chaff that like nobody knows
what to believe. Um, AND, um, and so, you
know, being flooded with with misinformation. Isn't just bad
because people will believe it. It's bad because um
it'll make people feel like they don't have any
way to know um what to believe and to
prevent them to believe from believing the truth. Of
course it all works very selectively, right? Um, SO,
so, um, uh, this, this, these strategic kind of
throw up all this, all this bullshit, um, um,
it's especially effective when, uh, you know, the thing
that's, um, That is being or belief is being
prevented is something that it would be like unpleasant
or inconvenient to believe anyway, um, um, so, uh,
you know, we, we use our skeptical instincts, um,
selectively and politically, um, but it all is part
of this kind of, um, ideological framework and that's
why I think, you know, this, uh, this conservative
bias, the status quo bias, and this negative epistemology
bias, they, they, they, they work tightly together to
um prevent people from feeling like they should um
um believe something surprising and do something that would,
you know, amount to radical reform. Mhm.
Great. So the book is again epistemic courage. I'm
leaving a link to it in the description of
the interview. And just before we go, Doctor Ichika,
would you like to tell people apart from the
book where they can find your work on the
internet? Oh,
sure, thanks. Yeah, um, I, I, uh, I have
a, I have a website jchikawa.net, um, where I
have, you know, a bit of an overview of
some of what I'm up to. Um, I used
to be active on, uh, what used to be
Twitter. Um, I do still have an account there,
although I may delete it soon. Um, uh, I,
I, I, I'd like to kind of get back
into more active public engagement, social media, and I
hope to do that, um, soon and maybe on
a different platform. Uh, THE past couple of years
I've been I'm pretty busy as a department head,
so, um, I haven't found the time to like,
um, be doing that all that much, but my
website's still there, um, and I, I, um, post,
you know, um, preprinted papers and new things up
there, descriptions of my new research. My new, my
new big research project is, um, um. Is one
focused on um feminist sexual ethics and the role
of consent, um, and so I'm, I'm, I've, I've
written some papers on that, you can find those
on the website and I'm hoping I'll be writing
a book about that um um before too long.
Um, SO I'm happy to hear from people about
um any of these ideas. I love talking about
this stuff, and I, I appreciate the time.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk with you.
Uh, LIKEWISE, it has been great. Thank you very
much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.